well here's a whale of a tale for you
why whales became the biggest animal of
all time
today's whales can grow up to a whopping
98 feet in length but did you know that
just a few million years ago they only
grew to about 32 feet have whales been
eating loads of spinach all these years
or did something shift over time that
made them grow into the massive sea
beasts they are today don't forget to
click on the subscribe button and turn
on notifications to join us on the
bright side of life the killer whale the
humpback whale the beluga whale the gray
whale the sperm okay you get it there
are lots of different species of whales
out there over 80 to be exact
well they may differ somewhat in color
and shape they're all pretty impressive
in size the sperm whale for example is
the largest toothed predator on earth
and the blue whale is the largest animal
ever that's right
ever they're larger than a dinosaur
woolly mammoth or any other living
creature we know of that has ever lived
on our planet pretty crazy right when
whales first came on the scene nearly 50
million years ago they looked nothing
like they do today in fact they didn't
even live underwater meat the first
whale pakicetus pretty cute right for a
while I can see this was a four-footed
land mammal and is known as the first
whale is that like say the first lady no
it is not it was about the size of a
wolf and was a carnivore how do we know
all this well according to the American
Museum of Natural History fossils found
in Pakistan back in 1983 revealed that
these mammals lived on land
shallow waters known as the tethoscape
some scientists believe that pakicetus
was a land dweller
who is forced to swim in the ocean due
to a lack of food on land or warm
temperatures as they spent more and more
time in the water the animal evolved
into a creature that lived in the sea
over the years this evolution helped the
whales to develop features like fins
instead of legs so that they could adapt
to living in the water pakicetus
displayed whale-like characteristics in
its an anime like a long skull
paleontologists also learned that it had
a unique ear bone something that's
distinctively well liked okay so there
are some similarities between today's
whales and the ancient pakicetus but how
did one turn into the other well just
like other living species on our planet
pakicetus evolved thanks to
environmental changes over time that
influenced the animals habitat diet and
behavior the Natural History Museum in
London explains that one of the first
evolved mammals to come from pakicetus
was a species known as ambulocetus now
it's not a whale Ambulance it lived near
estuary somewhere between 50 to 48
million years ago
similar to pakicetus this species of
early whale had four feet however its
hind legs were shorter and resembled
flippers they also formed a special tail
for swimming using these to swim faster
in the water can you imagine a whale
with four little legs it sounds kind of
cute doesn't it over a period of about
37 million years pakicetus gradually
evolved into over 80 different species
of whales you heard that right it took
37 million years for this evolution to
take place
that's why 27 and a half million years
ago one of the first whales was
significantly smaller than they are
today this particular species of whale
was just 18 feet long and had baleen
instead of teeth baleen is basically a
filtration system that whales have that
pushes water out of their mouths keeping
animals like krill which are small
shrimp-like crustaceans in their mouths
for them to eat the bristles of baleen
are comprised of keratin
the same keratin that humans have in
their fingernails and hair today about a
dozen existing whale species have baleen
the rest have teeth but these teeth are
different than the ones humans have
since they're designed to catch prey
rather than chew it
whales definitely didn't start out as
the Titans of the sea they are today as
their smaller size made them easy prey
for predators like hungry sharks
it wasn't until three million years ago
if things started to shift in the whales
favor this time was known as the Ice Age
as temperatures in the water began to
drop whales instinctively needed to pack
on extra pounds of blubber to keep them
warm
they are warm-blooded mammals after all
thanks to shifting currents and
temperature changes in the water the
ocean floor grew rich with plankton and
with this plankton came hungry krill to
sate whales were well fed at this time
was an understatement whales everywhere
filled their tummies with scrumptious
krill and they grew larger and larger
the whales that had developed baleen
instead of teeth took full advantage of
this never-ending feast since they were
better equipped to swallow up dense
patches of food thanks to their growing
size they were able to swim longer
distances to look for even more food and
reach warmer waters which encouraged
even more growth how far can these
whales travel you asked
today's humpback whales can travel over
5000 miles each year that's one of the
largest migrations of any animal on
earth whales are consistently the
biggest animal on our planet these days
the blue whale
for example weighs more than a Boeing
757 passengers and bags of peanuts not
included and their belly buttons are the
size of a dinner plate still not
impressed the blue whale is currently so
massive that if you were to take all its
blood vessels and form them into a
continuous line the whale would die but
the vessels could stretch from Pluto to
the Sun and back
over two and a half times is your mind
officially blown yet mine sure is well
today's whales are fully evolved from
pakicetus you can still see a glimpse of
their ancestors not just with the naked
eye of course some whales still have
remnants of what used to be a bone for a
hind leg in their skeleton it just
doesn't show outside the skin could you
imagine if whales still sported legs
like their early ancestors did that
would look pretty funny while science
has proven that whales have evolved from
pakicetus they have another possible
relative that still lives on earth with
us today
hippos yes those guys according to a
study conducted at the University of
Calgary in 2009 hippos are believed to
be the closest living relative to the
whale based on fossil evidence in DNA
data there seems to be a strong
relationship between whales and hippos
many scientists believe that hippos also
descended from pakicetus today's hippos
like whales spend tons of time in the
water and are also mammals however
before this study was conducted many
scientists argued that hippos were more
closely related to pigs cows sheep and
even giraffes if this were true whales
would be in the category of cloven
hoofed mammals known as artiodactyla
it's still argued in different circles
whether hippos are more closely related
to whales or pigs but as more and more
studies are conducted many scientists
are leaning toward calling hippos and
whales cousins no matter which mammals
whales are most closely related to
there's no denying that when it comes to
size they're truly one of a kind but how
much bigger are these whales going to
get many scientists believe that whales
have hit their capacity for growth once
they measure 109 feet that's because at
110 feet a whale can't physically close
their mouth within 10 seconds before
their prey escapes if it took any longer
they wouldn't be able to eat which would
lead to their death
did you know that a whale of 109 feet
can consume enough water to fill up a
large living room and that's every time
it opens its mouth to feed so there you
have it as they say all's well that ends
well
if you thought whales were cool before
watching this video I'll bet you're
super impressed now do you know of any
other animals that evolved over time
into completely different looking
creatures share your knowledge down in
the comments don't forget to give this
video a like share it with your friends
and click Subscribe stay on the bright
side
[Music]
you